(Transcribed by TurboScribe. Go Unlimited to remove this message.) Welcome back to the Deep Dive.
Today, we are, we're talking directly to you.
To the learner.
Exactly, to the learner.
Because we know you're here to, you know,
understand those deeper currents driving all the noise
of the modern world.
There's definitely a lot of noise out there
right now.
Oh, an unbelievable amount.
So I want you to think about something
for just a second.
Have you ever noticed how, like, a highly
publicized, catastrophic leak of proprietary AI code feels
weirdly similar to something else?
Similar to what?
Similar to that really hollow, overly wordy AI
-generated article you probably read yesterday.
Oh, right.
Like a blog post.
Yeah.
Like you look at a multi-billion dollar
tech disaster, right, where a massive corporation just
completely loses control of its crown jewels.
Right.
A total operational meltdown.
Exactly.
And then you look at a blog post
about, I don't know, the history of the
toaster, and it feels like it was written
by a robot that is just desperately trying
to hit a word count.
I know exactly the feeling you mean.
Right.
And somewhere deep down in your brain, this
little alarm goes off.
It's this intuitive sense of emptiness.
Yeah.
A lack of substance.
Exactly.
So what if I told you that those
two things aren't just kind of similar vibes?
What if they are actually the exact same
phenomenon, just playing out across completely different domains?
I mean, it sounds totally counterintuitive on its
face.
It really does.
Because we are so accustomed to separating software
engineering failures from bad writing, we treat the
software stuff as technical, objective, purely mathematical.
Right.
It's just code-breaking.
And we treat bad writing as a subjective
aesthetic problem.
Just bad style.
Yeah.
Totally different categories in our heads.
Exactly.
But if you strip away the surface features
and really look at the underlying architecture of
why both of those things break down.
And crucially, why they leave you with that
lingering feeling that something fundamental is just missing.
Yes.
If you look at that, the mathematics are
actually identical.
And that shared underlying architecture is our mission
today.
We are doing a deep dive into this
just brilliant piece of independent research.
It's an incredible essay.
It really is.
It's titled Constraint Closure and its Failures by
a researcher named Fliction.
And it was published on April 4th, 2026.
The scope of it is just massive.
Right.
We are going to unpack this, like, unified
mathematical framework that explains why complex systems completely
break down when they aren't properly constrained.
Whether we're talking about software pipelines on huge
server farms or just the essays you read
on your phone during your commute.
OK, so let's unpack this.
We are basically looking at a grand unified
theory of failure here.
We really are.
And the power of Fliction's work is how
it translates that intuitive frustration into rigorous math.
Yeah, that creeping sense of cognitive emptiness when
you read AI texts.
Exactly.
It gives us formal language so we can
move away from just complaining about soulless technology.
Right.
Which is a bit of a cliche at
this point.
It is.
This gives us a concrete structural analysis of
why these systems produce what they produce.
So to really grasp why the articles we
read feel broken, we first have to look
at the tech side.
How does a seemingly impenetrable, state-of-the
-art AI vault get cracked open?
You're referring to the recent code leak.
Yeah, exactly.
Recently, a major tech company suffered this massive
accidental release of their proprietary AI code.
And the media narrative on that was so
straightforward, wasn't it?
Oh, completely.
They just said it was an operational glitch.
You know, a rogue employee clicked the wrong
button, a cloud storage bucket was left public,
and boom.
The code is out in the wild.
Right.
But Flitching completely rejects that simplistic framing.
The essay argues we have to view this
as what they call a projection event.
Yes, a projection event.
And to grasp what that is, we have
to visualize the internal configuration of a massive
enterprise AI system.
Okay, let's visualize it.
Flitching designates this full state space as X.
Just the letter X.
Right.
And when we say X, we are not
just talking about the source code.
No.
X is the absolute totality of the system's
reality.
It encompasses the training data weights, the build
artifacts, the deployment scripts.
The internal organizational protocols.
Exactly.
And perhaps most importantly, the latent unspoken practices
of the actual engineering team who built it.
Oh, wow.
So it's everything.
It's a highly dimensional, incredibly complex, and entirely
hidden space.
It is the ultimate black box.
Because nobody on the outside, and honestly, probably
very few people even on the inside, have
a complete map of X.
The mathematics formalize that exact intuition.
No external observer has access to X.
Right.
But when a leak happens, the entirety of
X doesn't spill out.
What leaks is merely a lower dimensional slice
of that total reality.
Okay, so a slice.
Flitching designates this observable output as O.
Got it.
X is the hidden total.
O is the observable slice.
Exactly.
And the mathematical mapping that takes the hidden
reality of X and compresses it into the
observable evidence of O, that is what we
call the projection.
Okay, let me try to ground this with
an analogy for you, the learner.
Think about shadow puppetry.
Oh, that's a great way to look at
it.
Right.
So you're sitting in the audience, staring at
a blank wall.
Suddenly you see a shadow appear.
That shadow is the projection.
That's O.
Exactly.
The shadow is O.
But you don't instantly know the exact complex
three-dimensional shape of the hands behind the
screen casting it.
Because the hands are X.
Yes, the hands are X.
And because a shadow is just a 2D
projection of a 3D hand, there are technically,
I mean, lots of different ways a puppeteer
could contort their fingers to cast that exact
same silhouette.
That captures the mechanism perfectly.
In formal mathematical terms, we would say the
projection fails to be injective.
Injective.
Meaning what exactly?
An injective mapping means every single output corresponds
to one, and only one, unique input.
Okay, so a one-to-one relationship.
Right.
But because this projection is non-injective, multiple
hidden configurations, different hand shapes, in your analogy,
could produce the exact same observable output.
The same shadow.
Exactly.
And the collection of all possible hand shapes
that could mathematically cast that specific shadow is
what Fliction calls the observation-consistent set.
Okay, but here's where the shadow puppet analogy
reveals something really devastating about this specific AI
leak.
How so?
Well, if you see a shadow that looks
like a dog, and you know the person
behind the screen is, you know, trying to
entertain kids with animal shapes.
You have context.
Right, you have context.
You don't actually need to test every single
random mathematical configuration of human fingers.
You don't need to check if they're using
their elbows.
Exactly.
You can guess the hand shape pretty quickly,
based on your prior knowledge of how humans
naturally make shadow puppets.
Which brings us to the concept of near
-identifiability.
And this is really why the media narrative
of the leak missed the point so badly.
Because they just focused on the brooch itself.
Right.
When the AI code leaked, it was just
the shadow.
It might have included some module boundaries, interface
signatures, maybe some dependency relationship.
But the vast majority of the internal decisions,
the optimization choices, the hardware stuff, that was
all still hidden.
Yes.
So technically, the number of possible systems that
could match those leaked clues was astronomically large.
Right.
In information theory, we say the projection was
highly degenerate.
Hold on.
I want to clarify that word for our
listeners.
Because usually when we hear degenerate, we think
of, like, moral decay.
Right.
Like a degenerate gambler.
Yeah, exactly.
But in physics and mathematics, degeneracy means something
entirely different, right?
It does.
It means a loss of information, where multiple
distinct states collapse into the exact same measurable
outcome.
So informational degeneracy means there is a massive
amount of missing data.
Precisely.
The observable output, O, simply does not contain
enough information to uniquely identify the full state,
X.
OK.
So faced with a highly degenerate leak, how
on earth did competitors manage to reconstruct the
proprietary system so incredibly fast?
The answer to that lies in shared cultural
and technical gravity.
Yeah, think about it.
The AI community shares a massive amount of
background knowledge.
Engineers bounce between the exact same few megacorporations.
That's true.
They read the same Arcliffe papers.
They use the same open source tools.
I follow the same architectural conventions.
Infliction refers to this massive tool of shared
knowledge as the prior.
Ah, OK.
So the prior is like knowing the standard,
universally accepted ways people interlock their thumbs to
make a shadow puppet of a dog.
Exactly.
You don't have to reinvent the concept from
scratch.
You just pull the standard template off the
shelf that best fits the clues you have.
And because of this shared prior, the competitors
didn't have to exhaustively search through that mathematically
infinite observation-consistent set.
They didn't have to test every possible way
to build an AI.
No.
Instead, the shared conventions acted as a massive
gravitational pull toward a specific standard methodology.
Like a magnet.
Yeah.
And Infliction calls these gravitational centers prior-dominant
attractors.
Prior-dominant attractors.
I mean, I love the visual weight of
that term.
It sounds like astrophysics, but it really just
describes human nature.
It really does.
When humans build complex things, we don't usually
invent entirely new paradigms, right?
We just tend to fall into familiar grooves
because it is cognitively and economically cheaper.
It is an economic and computational necessity.
When reconstructors looked at the leaked code, they
basically set up a mathematical balancing act.
An energy functional, I think the paper calls
it.
Yes.
An energy functional.
On one side of the equation, they required
the reconstructed system to match the exact clues
that leaked.
Okay.
On the other side, they heavily penalized any
design choice that deviated from standard expected AI
architecture.
So if it got too weird, the math
punished it.
Exactly.
By utilizing an optimization algorithm called gradient descent,
they essentially let the math roll downhill into
the nearest, most logical valley of design.
Because gradient descent just seeks the path of
least resistance.
Right.
So the model naturally converged on the closest
working configuration that satisfied both the leaked constraints
and the shared industry standards.
And they achieved this with honestly terrifying speed.
The fact that working competitor replicas emerged just
days after the leak proved something chilling.
That the code was never truly safe.
The vault was an absolute illusion because it
was built using standard prefabricated parts that everyone
else in the industry already knew how to
assemble.
It forces a severe reevaluation of how we
scale security.
The effective security of an AI system does
not scale with the raw complexity of its
code.
It doesn't.
No, it scales with its structural uniqueness.
How weird and unpredictable it is compared to
the industry's prior dominant attractors.
Wow.
So if your system is highly conventional, its
effective degeneracy is low.
Meaning it's highly vulnerable to being reverse engineered
from just a tiny glimpse of its shadow.
Exactly.
The secret is out.
But this is where my practical everyday logic
completely clashed with the source material.
Well, my immediate question when I read about
this incident was, wait, if a corporation accidentally
leaks something, can't they just bring in an
army of lawyers?
Ah, the legal brute force approach.
Yeah.
Can't they issue massive cease and desists, patch
the software bucket, and basically force the genie
back into the bottle?
It is the reflexive corporate response, isn't it?
Yeah.
Issue a takedown notice, scrub the repositories, pretend
it never happened.
Right.
But Fliction argues this approach relies on a
fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of information.
Because we treat information like an object.
Exactly.
We treat it as a proprietary object, a
solid thing you can lock in a safe
or reclaim if it's stolen.
But it's not a solid thing.
No.
Information dissemination does not follow legal statutes.
It follows thermodynamic rules.
Thermodynamics.
We are applying the layers of heat and
energy transfer to software leaks now.
We have to walk through this carefully.
What does it mean for code to experience
entropy?
Consider the classic physics demonstration.
Driving a single drop of concentrated food coloring
into a clear glass of water.
Okay, I'm picturing it.
Before the drop hits the surface, the system
exists in a low entropy, highly ordered state.
The color is all in the dropper.
Right.
It's entirely contained.
And the water is perfectly clear.
But the moment that drop hits the water,
the precise moment the constraint boundary is breached,
the dye begins to diffuse.
It spreads out.
The molecules spread out randomly, colliding with water
molecules, seeking a state of equilibrium.
The entropy of the system, which is a
measure of its disorder, increases monotonically.
And crucially, you cannot just reach into that
glass of water with like a pair of
microscopic tweezers and pull the drop of dye
back out.
You can't.
It is an irreversible thermodynamic process.
Reversing it would require far more energy than
the system itself possesses.
Okay, so how does this map to the
leak?
Fliction models the spread of leaked code across
the internet, using the exact same diffusion equations
physicists use to model heat transfer or gas
dispersion.
Wow.
Once the informational boundary is ruptured, the data
propagates rapidly through the decentralized network.
It's on local drives, in encrypted chats, offline
environments.
So sending a legal takedown notice to a
central server.
Does not reverse the diffusion process.
The system has already relaxed into a new,
fundamentally higher entropy state where the information is
ubiquitous.
So a cease and desist letter is essentially
a lawyer yelling at a glass of water
to unmix itself.
That's a very good way to put it.
You are attempting to impose a brand new
artificial boundary on a physical system that has
already permanently changed its state.
That really highlights the futility of applying legal
fictions to mathematical realities.
And this thermodynamic perspective forces us to radically
rethink the underlying economics of the AI industry,
doesn't it?
It absolutely does.
Because we tend to assume that the astronomical
valuations of these AI companies are based on
the brilliant proprietary math hidden inside their models.
Right, the secret sauce.
But Fliction points out a hard truth.
The true economic product of these companies is
not the algorithm.
The product is the computational enclosure.
The computational enclosure.
Let's spend some time defining that because grasping
this concept feels like pulling back the curtain
on the entire tech economy.
Let's do it.
Historically, the concept of economic enclosure refers to
the transition from communal land where, you know,
peasants could freely graze their sheep to privatized
property.
Where wealthy landowners put up fences and charge
for access.
Exactly.
Computational enclosure operates on the exact same principle.
The underlying computational processes of a large language
model could, in theory, be replicated by anyone
with sufficient compute resources and a grasp of
the shared industry prior.
Because it's all just math based on standard
architecture.
Right.
So the company's actual product is not the
underlying math.
It is the interface, the digital fence, that
regulates access to that math and charges you
a microtransaction toll every time you use it.
So the API is the fence.
The API is the literal manifestation of the
computational enclosure.
And the economic strength of that fence, the
justification for a multi-billion dollar valuation, is
entirely dependent on the reconstruction costs.
Meaning, how expensive is it for a competitor
to just build their own equivalent version from
scratch?
Precisely.
But the leak proved that the reconstruction cost
was shockingly, devastatingly low.
It was.
Because of those shared priors we just discussed,
competitors grabbed the diffused clues, ran their gradient
descent algorithms, and rebuilt the system for pennies
on the dollar.
The leak didn't just expose a few gigabytes
of code.
It exposed a massive economic vulnerability.
It proved the enclosure strength was incredibly weak.
A structural revelation that terrified investors, I imagine?
Oh, definitely.
It demonstrated that the proprietary system existed in
a regime of low effective degeneracy.
The magic trick wasn't actually that complex once
you got a brief glimpse of how the
mirrors were angled.
And even without a catastrophic leak, the paper
argues that this enclosure naturally rots away over
time, right?
Flitchin argues that computational enclosure strength inevitably decays.
As the global field of AI research publishes
more papers, standardizes more frameworks, shares more open
source tools...
The shared prior gets richer and richer.
Exactly.
And as the prior gets richer, the cost
of reconstruction drops precipitously.
So the fence doesn't just get breached, it
rots away on its own due to the
natural diffusion of knowledge.
Wow.
Okay, so we have an economic enclosure that
is fundamentally fragile and constantly degrading.
But if we return to this specific inciting
incident, how did the fence rupture in the
first place?
That's the million-dollar question.
Right.
If these companies are worth billions, why are
they leaving the gate unlocked?
It wasn't a random glitch.
Flitchin argues the leak was a direct mathematical
byproduct of the modern tech industry's absolute obsession
with speed.
Speed is the critical variable here.
Which requires us to look at the software
pipeline itself as a physical system.
We have to move beyond thinking of software
development as just a static checklist of tasks.
Flitchin models the high-velocity development environment as
a constrained dynamical system.
A constrained dynamical system.
Imagine the entire life cycle of code writing,
compiling, testing, deploying as a continuous path or
a trajectory moving through a vast space of
possible states.
And for the code to be safe, there
are strict rules about where that trajectory is
allowed to wander.
Like security protocols, compliance checks.
Right.
Those rules act as boundaries.
In order for the pipeline to achieve what
Flitchin terms constrained closure, every single step of
that trajectory must remain within an admissible, mathematically
safe state.
If the process adheres to all the constraints,
the system remains closed and the code stays
inside the vault.
Exactly.
However, the real world introduces a massive chaotic
vulnerability into this idealized mathematical model.
And what is that?
Human-in-the-loop manual steps.
Ah.
Because humans are magnificent, but we are fundamentally
chaotic.
We are not fixed computational rules.
Our performance fluctuates based on, you know, judgment,
attention span, stress, whether we've had our second
cup of coffee.
Human variables.
And this is where my absolute favorite analogy
for this entire deep dive comes into play.
You know the classic iconic scene from I
Love Lucy at the Chocolate Factory?
Where Lucy and Ethel are stationed at the
conveyor belt.
Yes.
They are standing at the conveyor belt, and
their job is to wrap every single piece
of chocolate as it passes by.
And in our model, wrapping the chocolate represents
the manual constraint enforcement.
Exactly.
The human verifying that the code is safe.
As long as the conveyor belt is moving
at a reasonable, manageable speed, Lucy and Ethel
can easily verify every chocolate, wrap it securely,
and the system maintains constraint closure.
But then the foreman yells, speed it up!
Speed it up!
Right.
The iteration velocity of the pipeline dramatically increases.
And the physical limits of the human operators
are breached.
Chaos ensues.
The chocolates start flying down the belt faster
than human hands can move.
Lucy is frantically stuffing them into her hat,
down her shirt, shoving them in her mouth.
She cannot possibly verify the constraints of every
single chocolate because the system is operating at
a velocity that exceeds her cognitive bandwidth.
And eventually, as inevitable as gravity, an unwrapped,
naked chocolate makes it through to the packing
room.
A leak happens.
That television analogy maps with startling precision to
Flixian's mathematical elaboration of trajectory escape.
Let's formalize the Chocolate Factory.
Let's do it.
Let the variable v represent the iteration velocity
of the development pipeline.
The speed at which management demands new features
be pushed.
OK, v is velocity.
As v increases, the time budget allocated for
a human operator to verify the constraints at
each manual step proportionally shrinks.
The belt speeds up so you have less
time per chocolate.
Now, assuming the cognitive cost of verifying a
piece of complex code remains constant, the probability
of successful constraint enforcement by a human decreases
monotonically as v increases.
It's just simple, unavoidable probability.
Yes.
If you have a deployment pipeline with, say,
different manual verification steps, the chance of the
system remaining secure over its entire execution is
the mathematical product of the probabilities of each
human getting it right at every step.
And when you multiply a bunch of fractions
together, the number just gets smaller and smaller.
Exactly.
If any single one of those probabilities drops
below 100%, the pipeline fundamentally fails to achieve
constraint closure.
The math practically guarantees a failure over a
long enough timeline.
So a leak, therefore, is not an individual
employee's moral or professional failure.
Not at all.
It is not Lucy's fault that the chocolate
escaped.
Right.
It's a structural certainty inherent to the system's
architecture.
If an organization demands high-velocity iteration but
relies on manual human verification, the probability of
trajectory escape eventually reaches 100%.
The system was simply moving too fast, under
too much pressure, to maintain constraint closure.
This is such a profound shift in perspective.
We have a complex system moving too fast,
relying on unconstrained human actions, ultimately producing an
escape trajectory.
Which results in the thermodynamic diffusion of proprietary
code.
And here, Lerner, is where we make the
grand pivot.
This is the moment Fliction's research genuinely broke
my brain.
It's a massive leap.
We are going to take this exact mathematical
framework—state spaces, projections, trajectory escapes, constraint
closures—and we are going to apply it to
something that seems entirely disconnected from software engineering.
We are applying it to essays.
Yes.
To the articles and arguments you read on
the internet every single day.
This is the intellectual leap that elevates the
essay from a tech critique to a profound
commentary on human communication.
The central thesis is that an essay and
a software pipeline possess identical formal structures.
Now, I have to admit, I wrestled with
this at first.
An essay is a piece of text.
It's just words on a page.
A software pipeline is executing code.
How can they possibly be formally identical?
It requires us to completely shift how we
perceive the act of writing.
We're conditioned to think of an essay as
a static artifact—a document sitting quietly on a
screen.
Right.
But Fliction argues that this is an illusion.
An essay is not an artifact.
It is a process.
It is a trajectory moving through a highly
dimensional space of possible states, operating under the
exact same mechanical principles as the software pipeline.
So instead of code moving through testing and
deployment, we are talking about human thought moving
from an initial premise, navigating through evidence, and
arriving at a logical conclusion.
Yes.
And what prevents that trajectory of thought from
simply wandering off into random, disconnected gibberish?
Constraints.
In a software pipeline, constraints are security protocols.
In the architecture of an essay, the constraints
are your foundational premises, your operational definitions, the
specific logical tensions you are attempting to resolve.
Let me test this to make sure I've
got it.
If I sit down and write the sentence,
I am going to argue that implementing strict
rent control ultimately decreases the overall housing supply.
Okay.
A strong premise.
Right.
I have immediately and drastically constrained my trajectory.
I cannot, in the very next paragraph, suddenly
start discussing my grandmother's secret recipe for lasagna.
Or the migration patterns of monarch butterflies.
Exactly.
That initial premise forces me down a very
specific, narrowing logical path.
Every subsequent sentence must serve the resolution of
that initial tension.
You have established a defined constraint space.
And just like a software pipeline requires constraint
closure to produce a secure outcome, a genuine
essay requires argumentative constraint closure.
Argumentative constraint closure.
Yes.
Every single sentence must be strictly determined by
the logical relations specified by your foundational structure.
No claim can simply appear randomly.
It must be necessary.
And this is where the framework exposes the
hollow reality of generative AI.
Think about what happens, Lerner, when you open
up a chatbot interface and type an unconstrained
prompt.
Like, write a thousand-word essay on the
fall of the Roman Empire.
Right.
You aren't providing it with any specific premises.
You aren't introducing a novel logical tension for
it to resolve.
You are providing zero architectural constraints.
So, mathematically, what does the AI do?
Tell me.
It executes the exact same process the competitors
used when they reverse-engineered the leaked code.
Faced with an unconstrained trajectory, it gravitates immediately
toward a prior dominant attractor.
Oh, it goes straight to the shadow puppet
of a dog.
Exactly.
The large language model's training data is saturated
with millions of essays and summaries about the
Roman Empire.
That massive dataset forms a topological prior landscape.
So when you issue an unconstrained prompt, you're
dropping a ball onto that landscape, and it
just rolls downhill.
Into the nearest, deepest basin of statistical likelihood.
It generates a sequence of tokens that perfectly
mimics the surface topology of an essay.
It uses the correct disciplinary vocabulary.
It puts in paragraph breaks.
It uses transitional phrases like furthermore and in
conclusion.
But beneath that surface, there is no underlying
argumentative architecture.
It's reproducing the high-dimensional surface properties without
any of the substance.
It's casting a perfectly crisp shadow on the
wall, but there are no actual hands behind
the screen making the shape.
It's an optical illusion of thought.
Wow.
And this phenomenon brings us to the critical
concept of necessity.
In a true constraint-closed argument, a genuine
essay, every sentence possesses necessity.
It must be there.
It carries weight.
Yes.
If you perturb the text, say, you remove
a core sentence or swap the order of
two paragraphs, the entire logical structure breaks down.
The conclusion becomes unsupported.
Because it's fragile.
And that fragility is actually the ultimate signal
of intellectual rigor.
It proves the trajectory was tightly constrained.
The argument has a strict directionality.
It's a one-way street.
Contrast that with the AI-generated essay.
Because there's no constraint closure, the text lacks
necessity entirely.
It is merely a sequence of locally plausible
but globally arbitrary steps.
Right.
So sentence B follows sentence A simply because
it's statistically highly probable to do so based
on the training data, not because it logically
must follow to resolve a specific tension.
So the text is locally coherent.
The grammar is fine.
The sentences make sense in isolation.
But globally, it is entirely arbitrary.
It is an essay-shaped object, but it
is intellectually inert.
An essay-shaped object.
That phrase is haunting because it perfectly describes
the media environment we are just drowning in
right now.
You see it everywhere.
You click on an article online.
It reads perfectly fine.
The grammar is flawless.
The tone is authoritative.
It's 2,000 words long.
And yet by the time you reach the
final period, you realize you haven't actually learned
a single new thing.
You've consumed zero calories of intellectual nutrition.
You have read a shadow.
And this brings us to a monumental epistemological
shift.
We need to talk about why length, which
used to be our gold standard for judging
quality, has completely collapsed as a useful signal.
To understand a collapse, we have to look
at the historical economics of writing.
Let's do that.
For centuries, if you encountered a 5,000
-word essay that was structurally organized, grammatically sophisticated,
and possessed a coherent narrative flow, you could
safely, rationally assume it was a piece of
serious intellectual work.
Right, because generating 5,000 coherent words used
to be agonizingly, physically, and mentally difficult.
It took days, weeks, months of research and
editing.
The production costs were prohibitively high.
Therefore, surface features like length and structural organization
functioned as highly reliable proxies for a hidden
property—human cognitive effort.
Because faking a long, logically flowing essay was
just too extensive in terms of time and
caloric energy?
Exactly.
The observable form and the hidden substance were
intimately and securely correlated.
It's like, if I walk into a house
and see a massive, incredibly ornate, hand-carved,
mahogany dining table, I instantly assume a master
arpenter spent hundreds of hours meticulously chiseling away
at it.
The sheer surface complexity of the table acts
as definitive proof of the underlying human effort.
Right.
That was the reality of the pre-generative
era.
But the advent of large language models has
completely severed that historical correlation.
Generative systems can now produce those high-dimensional
surface properties—length, organization, vocabulary—at a marginal cost
approaching zero.
The projection has been violently decoupled from the
configuration it historically represented.
It's like discovering that someone just invented a
massive 3D printer that can spit out a
visually flawless replica of that mahogany table in
five seconds for about three cents worth of
plastic.
Suddenly, the ornate carvings don't tell you anything
about human effort anymore.
The visual signal has been totally hollowed out.
And Flicktion defines this new reality through the
formal concept of informational emptiness.
To grasp this, we look to information theory,
specifically the concept of mutual information.
Okay, mutual information, what is that measuring?
Mutual information measures how much knowing the